In the traditional implementation,
the user fills in a registration form first with the
necessary information required.
This then create a new user, links them to a new portfolio,
and sets everything up in a database, and then the user signs in.
Now, with social login, the idea is to make it as simple and smooth as possible,
one‑click registration and sign‑in.
So if it's the first time the user signs in via social login,
we need to also create a new portfolio for the user and link it
to their social provider's identity so that we can retrieve the
portfolio each time they sign in.
With an OpenID Connect provider,
we can be confident that the subject claim will uniquely identify the
user as the spec demands that it's a unique identifier.
For OAuth 2, however, you would need to check the provider's documents.
Now, Facebook have an ID field that we can use for this; however,
when using other providers,
make sure the identifier you choose is unique as some
providers might allow users to change emails,
etc.
So be aware of that before considering whatever claim you're
going to use to uniquely identify the user.
You don't want a situation where the user changes their email or changes
some sort of identifier and loses track of their portfolio.
Now, in our code, we can use the AuthenticationSuccessHandler,
which as the name suggests,
gets triggered after the user has been successfully authenticated.
You can create a class that implements the
AuthenticationSuccessHandler interface,
overriding the onAuthenticationSuccess method that gives you access to the HTTP
request and response objects and the authentication object.
I'm going to annotate it with component as I need the
following services to be autowired in.
Then in our SecurityConfiguration adapter,
just plug in the handler via the OAuth 2 builder. Okay,
that's it.
Let's get back to our success handler.
So in this class, we can then check if the user has a portfolio.
If not,
we'll create one for them and perform any sort of setups we might require.
We could even redirect them to different parts of the application.
One thing to note is that Spring also supports an AuthenticationFailureHandler,
which as the name suggests,
is the inverse. It would trigger if an authentication
fails. You can also get the authentication that uses
details via the Authentication object,
which is an interface. as there are many different implementations of this
interface depending on how the user was authenticated. Our demo application
supports form, OAuth 2, and OpenID Connect.
So depending on how the user signed in, the implementation of this
authentication object will be different, either a
UsernameAndPasswordAuthenticationToken or an OAuth2AuthenticationToken,
hence you might need to check the type of this object.
Now, I'm going to put a breakpoint here to show you this object.
It's authenticated, the authorizedClient is facebook,
the principle,
which is the object that represents the logged‑in user, you can see it has all
the attributes returned back from the user and for endpoint.
There is also a nameAttributeKey field,
which is the attribute that represents the unique ID for this user.
Now, using the ID, we can check if there is a portfolio.
If not,
we can automatically register the user based on the
claims returned from the OAuth 2 provider.
Let's start with Facebook.
We can use the getAuthorizedClientRegistrationId to determine
which provider the user signed in with,
and then we can prepopulate the user registration request with
the first and lastName, email, username.
Now, because Facebook doesn't support OpenID Connect,
you have to go through their documentation to find out all the field names,
etc., so the relevant information that you need.
So let's set the email. Now, for the name, Facebook sends the whole name,
so we need to split the string.
Job done.
The user is now registered without filling in any form,
and we don't have to store any of their fields or
passwords in a data store; however, if you need additional information,
you can always redirect the user to a follow‑up registration
form or request form that they need to fill in.
Now, Google, it's an OpenID Connect provider, so it's super easy for developers.
You will now see the benefits of using OpenID Connect as we can now
use the same code for each OpenID Connect provider.
The principal object will be of type OidcUser,
and it extends the OAuth2 user,
which makes sense as OpenID Connect is built on top of OAuth2.
Now, for this object,
Spring has mapped all the OpenID Connect specification fields
and provided getters and setters for you.
So for username,
we can safely use the subject field, no matter what provider it is as OpenID
Connect clearly states that this field must be unique.
Now, additionally, the OicdUser also gives you access to the identity token.
There, nice and easy.
Wouldn't the world be wonderful if we could also have getters for
the non‑OpenID Connect providers, like Facebook?
Well, the Spring team have kind of made that possible.
All you need to do is create a bin class that implements the OAuth2
user interface and override the required methods.
Now, for all the claims attributes that you need,
create setters and getters for them and make sure the names
match the attributes. Spring will then map them to these
objects for you. For authorities,
I'll just return ROLE_USER, which is the default for Spring, and you
can also populate the AttributeMap if you want.
Now, this is also a very cool security feature as you're limiting
the user data your application is exposed to, which then limits the
impact of any breaches, say someone decides to log this object and
then someone scrapes from your logs, so you should always use the
bare minimum required.
In fact, that's generally now a requirement by law.
Now, let's refactor our AuthenticationSuccessHandler. Much better.
Next, let's look at the authentication object in more detail and how you can use it throughout your application.